[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today we're
going to talk about factoring polynomials and
poly numbers. First, I'll review some basic facts
about factoring with ordinary natural numbers.
So, a few definitions just to remind you: if 2
times 3 equals 6, we say that 6 is a multiple
of 2 or a multiple of 3, and we say that 2 and
3 are divisors or factors of 6. If we take a
bigger number like, say, 1001, then it could
be factored in a number of different ways to
be written as 77 times 13, or 7 times 143, or
as 1 times 1001—that's also a factorization.
So although it may appear that there are lots of
different ways of factoring a number, there's a
very important and fundamental theorem called, in
fact, the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, which
says that every natural number can, in fact, be
factored uniquely—in other words, in only one way,
up to order—into prime factors. A prime number, I
remind you, is a number that only has two factors,
namely 1 and itself, for example, 3, 5, 7, 11,
13, 17, 19, and so on. So the Fundamental Theorem
of Arithmetic means that we can express every
natural number as a product of prime numbers,
and there's only one way of doing that up to
the order in which we present those primes.
So, for example, 1001 is 7 times 11 times 13.
1002 is 2 times 3 times 167. 267 is prime. 1003
is 17 times 59. 1004 is 2 squared times 251.
There's no reason why a prime factor can't
appear more than once in the factorization of a
number. There's 1005 and 1006, and this already
indicates a major interesting aspect of this: that
factoring large numbers is highly unpredictable.
It's not at all obvious how to extend this
table to the next twenty or thirty. There are
a few patterns that are kind of obvious—I mean,
obviously, every even number is divisible by 2,
and if this number is divisible by 3, then the
one after it is also going to be divisible by
3—but aside from those relatively trivial remarks,
it's very hard to predict how a random big number
factors into primes. And that's a major important
fact when it comes to encoding or encrypting
information, say, on the internet. This unique
factorization theorem plays a very important role.
Alright, so we're not going to prove these facts.
These are kind of standard facts—there's nothing
problematic about them, I think, once you've
set up arithmetic as we have done. But we are
going to be interested in extending this kind
of thinking to poly numbers and polynomials,
which are, as we've seen last time,
just certain types of poly numbers.
The poly number (1, 2) times the poly number (3,
5) is the poly number (3, 11, 10). So we say that
(3, 11, 10) is a multiple of (1, 2) or a multiple
of (3, 5). Now, we say that (1, 2) and (3,
5) are factors or divisors of (3, 11, 10). And a
natural question is, suppose we were given (3, 11,
10)—how could we find its factors? Well, for that,
it helps to look at the general formula. If we
multiply the binomial (a, b) with the binomial (c,
d), we get (ac, ad + bc, bd). That's a trinomial.
So if we stare at this, it helps us solve this
problem. For example, suppose you're given the
trinomial (7, 45, 18), and you want to write it as
(a, b) times (c, d) for some (a, b) and some (c,
d). Well, then ac has got to be 7, and these are
natural numbers. a and c are either (1, 7) or (7,
1). In other words, the set  has got to be
equal to the set . Similarly, bd has got
to equal 18. So now there are more possibilities
because 18 is not prime; they could be (1, 18),
(2, 9), or (3, 6) in either order. And there's
one more piece of information: the middle term,
ad + bc—this times this plus this times this—has
got to equal 45. And now it's a standard kind of
little game at one place, looking at all the
possibilities. How could we choose these two
numbers? Now, how do we choose a pair here so
that the a times the d plus the b times the c
should equal 45? Well, there's only going to be
one way, and that turns out to be the solution. So
we tried 1 times 9 plus 7 times 2—well, that
wouldn't work. We've got 1 times 3 plus 6 times
7—1 times 3 plus 6 times 7—that would work, giving
us 45. And so that's how we get the factorization,
by essentially looking through all the
possibilities encoded by these 3 equations.
In more familiar high school terms, what
we've done is we've taken the trinomial
(7 + 45x + 18x²) and we've factored
it into two binomial expressions:
(1 + 6x) and (7 + 3x). We rather think
of this expression as representing this
equality between this polynomial and these
two polynomials—that's really the same thing.
So at this point, it's probably a good exercise
for you to take a few binomial poly numbers and
multiply them to get a trinomial, and then put
it aside for a day or two and then come back and
see if you can factor those trinomials—go reverse
the process to find the factors. Some trinomials
cannot be factored. If you just write down a
random one, then it's very likely that it cannot
be factored. For example, it's not hard to see
that the poly number (1, 5, 1) cannot be factored
into two binomials. So the question is, should we
call that kind of poly number a prime polynomial?
However, an interesting complication arises
when we move from binomials and trinomials
to slightly larger poly numbers, and here's a
very interesting example: the poly number (1,
-1, 1), which is itself a trinomial, times (1,
1, 1) is (1, 0, 1, 0, 1). So this poly number,
which is a positive poly number, factors, but
one of its factors—this one here—is a poly
number with a negative coefficient. Up to now,
we have not been including this possibility;
we've only restricted ourselves to positive
coefficients. But it turns out that if we do that,
we miss out on this phenomenon here. And this
is something that's quite different between
polynomials or poly numbers and ordinary natural
numbers. For ordinary natural number division
or factorization, negative numbers play no
essential role. However, for poly numbers,
they play a very important role. Certain
factorizations are possible with negative
coefficients that are simply not possible
if you restrict to positive coefficients.
So the mathematics is forcing us to
enlarge our view. We're going to have
to move from positive poly numbers to
talking about integral poly numbers.
And what is an integral poly number? It's an
expression just like a positive poly number,
except that the entries
are allowed to be integers.
This defines a new mathematical object called
an integral poly number, and we'll give it this
title: poly-int, for integral poly number. This
is a very nice realm for doing arithmetic with
poly numbers. It's, in fact, better in many ways
than sticking to positive poly numbers. So we're
going to have to do that now. We're going to have
to rethink what we've done, move to integral poly
numbers, and investigate the arithmetic of
these. When we do that, we will see that
primes and fundamental theorems come into focus
for us, and it becomes very rich and beautiful.
So next time, it's arithmetic
with integral poly numbers. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]